welcome to sam's business growth show
i'm sam dunning a digital marketing
sales and business growth evangelist
tune in and subscribe today as i'll be
interviewing business leaders
experts and entrepreneurs from around
the globe you'll be learning their story
how digital marketing has helped them
along the way and exclusive tips
insights to help you skyrocket your own
business
[Music]
and welcome back to a fresh episode of
sam's business growth
show delighted today to be joined by
david meerman scott
david spotted the real-time marketing
revolution back in its infancy
and wrote five books about it including
new rules of marketing in pr
with more than 400 000 copies that were
sold in english and available in 29
different languages from albanian to
vietnamese
now david taps into the mindset that
relationships with customers
are more important than the products
that we sell to them
david a very warm welcome how are you
good damn thanks i'm doing great how are
you doing
yeah well good on this side my friend
and looking forward to this conversation
i think we're going to take a bit of a
different angle that we're yet to cover
on the show
and home in them how we can turn our
customers
into fans um but before we get into that
david perhaps you could give us a couple
minutes background on your good self
how you got into the business world and
for anyone that does not know david mim
and scott what you're about
and if you want to incorporate a story a
bit of background that would be much
appreciated
sure uh when i got out of university i
thought
i wanted to be a bond trader started
working on wall street hated it was
terrible at it
but i loved the information that bond
traders were using companies like
reuters
and dow jones and so i went into that
industry
as a marketer and i spent 10 years in
asia
about seven years in tokyo the rest in
hong kong
and then came back i live outside of
boston
and worked for technology companies here
always focused on this idea of real-time
information
and then about 18 years ago i was sacked
by thompson reuters
okay started to go out on my own
um to teach people how to
reach customers turn them into fans
on the web specifically on the web and
this is way pre-social media
and fortunately my books have done well
i've had
four international bestsellers the one
that you mentioned the new rules of
marketing in pr has
sold like crazy it's now in the seventh
edition
and my latest book which came out early
this year is called fanocracy
turning fans into customers and
customers into fans
that hit the wall street journal
bestseller list when it came out
um so i'm all about trying to
teach people um to be more human and be
more effective in the way they market
and not just try to coerce people
into doing something i've been happily
unemployed
for 18 years good man sounds like a
great cause
all right dave well let's let's jump
into the main topic how we can turn our
customers into fans
perhaps you could give us a bit of
background on what that actually means
what
what is the process of turning our
customers into fans and why is that
important
so i um i wrote this book fanocracy
with my um now 28 year old daughter
raco actually 27 year old daughter raco
raco and i have the same ideas about
fandom
we both had this sense that the things
that we're a fan of in our life
are so important to us um in my case
i'm a huge huge fan of live music
i'm gonna take my little camera here and
show you my live music hall of fame in
my office
um i've been to 804 live music shows
75 grateful dead concerts
uh and my daughter reiko um uh is a huge
harry potter fan she's not only seen
every movie multiple times read every
book multiple times
um been to the uk to go on the studio
tour the
also went to the wizarding world theme
park in orlando several times but she
wrote an 85 000 word alternative ending
to the harry potter series
where draco malfoy is a spy for the
order of the phoenix and put that on a
fan fiction site so she's dug deep into
the harry potter fandom
raco also happens to be a neuroscientist
she graduated with a degree from
columbia university then went on to
medical school
and is currently in emergency room
physician at boston medical center
so we looked at very specifically
the neuroscience behind why
and how people become fans of a company
a product or service an idea
and it turns out that a lot of it is
rooted in neuroscience because we
humans want to be part of a tribe of
like-minded people
so when i'm in a grateful dead concert
or reiko is with her harry potter
friends
that's a tribe and all of us have an
opportunity to build a tribe of
like-minded people that's actually what
you're doing right now sam by
by doing um a series like this and
bringing people together
um to learn from people like me you're
building a tribe
and that is such a cool way to build
business
and uh it's a different way than most
people do
got it man um now that makes sense and
why is it
important that us as business owners or
sales professionals or marketers
look to follow this process in terms of
turning our customers into fans and
can you perhaps give us some actionable
examples or ways that we can make that
happen david
yes so you know a lot of times what
people um
in business do is they really you know
they try to coerce people into doing
business with them they
um they're just out there trying to sell
sell sell
or use the web to try to get you to
click on something and put you into
their click funnels and whatnot
and i think that what's better is to
make a friend make a fan first
you don't have to pitch your products
right away
and then you and then once you've got
the fan base then they will want to do
business with you they'll be
eager to do business with you and many
times
as reiko and i've been talking about
these ideas people say to us but
i can't build fans i'm not in the kind
of business that can build fans i'm a
and then they make an excuse i'm a
doctor i'm a lawyer i'm an edb
software company um we do it we're a
commodity business whatever it is
um so sam are you a fan of your
automobile insurance company
wouldn't a thought says it's a funny
plan you should bring it up because i've
actually got to renew my car insurance
in the next few days
it's one of those things i always always
leave to the very last minute david
most hate it most people are like that
most people hate their insurance company
don't want us
free up it's like no fun i mean think
about it insurance no one wants to write
that check and furthermore you never
want to use the product because
it meant you crashed your car
that's why it's so interesting to look
at a company called hagerty insurance
so we ran across them i ran across them
18 years ago because i have a 1973 land
rover series 3
classic car that's been insured by
hagerty since then
and i always felt like wow these guys
have built a fandom
so i had a chance to interview michael
hagerty who's the entrepreneurial owner
of hagerty insurance and i said
how do you do this how do you how do you
build your business and he said david
everyone in the insurance business is
all about
either being the low-cost provider
or spending more money than the other
guys on advertising
we had a different approach he told me
what we did was we went out to grow
fans of our business and they've done a
fabulous job so what did they do
um they went they go to well over a
hundred
classic car shows a year now not so many
in the pandemic because of
distancing and whatnot but overall on a
typical year over 100 car shows
where they meet with people they provide
free advice they run seminars at the
classic car shows
and their focus is 100 on classic cars
they have a youtube channel with over a
million subscribers they have a
drivers club with 650 000 members and
and the drivers club are away for people
who share a passion for the same type of
car to get together
they um also realized that they have
probably the world's best database of
true
values of how much classic cars are
worth
because they know the amount of money
that people are insuring
their car for the value of them and so
they made that
that database freely available so that
people could gauge how much their car is
worth
all of these things are put out there
for free
not to coerce people into buying a
product right away but to get them to
become a fan
first then they want to do business with
hagerty
they are growing by double digits every
single year they'll grow by 200 000 new
customers this year
and they are the largest classic car
insurance company in the world they're
now
branching out into classic motorcycles
classic airplanes and classic boats
fabulous success story all built on fans
awesome man so it sounds like like you
say they wanted to be different
so that as you mentioned many insurance
companies it's a case of especially i
know when i'm doing my insurance using
carrying on with that example i'm
usually looking for the the cheapest
rate
it's going to cover all the bits and
pieces that i need for my car i just
drive a cheap run around i'm not really
a car guy even even my
fiancee's got a better car than my media
and here's another interesting point on
that on on that particular
example that you just shared about how
you do business
uh around insurance is that um if you
build a business based on fandom
if you grow fans of your business
people are reluctant to leave
even if they find a better price even
if they find the better faster cheaper
alternative
so you know like i said earlier i've
been a customer of hagerty for more than
15 years
i love what they do i don't mind writing
the check to them every year
you know they send me the magazine every
um every two months which i love they
they've got all this data that i can
access which i love
and if another company were to approach
me and say hey we also do classic car
insurance and we're 25
cheaper than hagerty i'd say thanks a
lot i'm not interested
so that's another cool thing about
building fans
is that if you're just selling a product
or service people can leave
and will leave for something a little
bit better if you're
building fans fans are reluctant to
leave so you're building for the long
term
yeah it's a really great example i like
it and as you mentioned it sounds like
they tapped into quite a few different
channels
be it attending the trade shows with the
classic cars be it on youtube and be it
creating some kind of forum it sounded
like with the database and making this
all free
free resources that either existing
customers or people that haven't yet
used them can tap into
actually get stuck into um for companies
that
aren't quite on that kind of scale in
terms of established businesses don't
have that kind of investment to put into
all these different channels
what would you suggest david perhaps for
for startups or smaller based businesses
or how they can
start generating fans one of the things
that's most interesting to me right now
because we're in the middle of a
pandemic is the idea
of video using video and that's also
interestingly rooted in neuroscience
and the idea of video as being very
effective
has a very specific root in
this idea of neuroscience and i'll
explain it to you so
um we um we humans
as i mentioned earlier are hardwired to
want to be part of a tribe
of like-minded people when i'm with my
tribe of grateful dead fans i feel safe
and comfortable
when my daughter reiko is with her tribe
of harry potter friends
she's safe and comfortable when i'm with
classic car owners perhaps hanging out
at the hagerty booth at a classic car
show
i'm safe and comfortable it's my tribe
of people
and that's actually rooted in us as a
survival technique
because okay going back tens of
thousands of years
if you were um out in the woods or out
on the plains with your
tribe and those were people that you
are familiar with comfortable with live
with you are much
safer than if you're alone or much safer
than if you encounter
um a rival tribe of of some kind or
or wild animals or whatever and so that
actually still sticks with us humans
and so the more a business
can build a tribe the more the business
can actually
meet with people and uh meet with them
in the same way that these examples i
shared where people are come together
is really important now i recognize
we're in a pandemic
which brings us to video but i want to
explain a little bit about this idea of
proximity first
a neuroscientist named edward t hall
identified different
levels of proximity in other words how
close one human being is to another
human being
further than 12 feet he called public
space
in public space we know our brains know
that there are people in our public
space further than 12 feet away from us
we know they're there
but we don't actively track them between
feet and about 4 feet edward t hall
called social space
many people think that's why we now call
it social distancing during the pandemic
keeping people in your social space
and inside of four feet is called
personal space
personal space is sort of cocktail party
distance
or in a in a at a small table you across
the way from a couple of friends having
a conversation
that's a personal space the closer you
get to someone the more powerful the
shared emotions are
um and as if you are with people you
like
in a pub at a cocktail party you feel
safe and secure or at that haggerty
um tent on the at the car show or at a
grateful dead concert for me we're safe
and secure
you get into a crowded lift a crowded
elevator and you don't
feel safe because you're with people
that are not a part of your tribe
so in normal circumstances non-pandemic
the more you can
get close to people and build fans the
better
but during the pandemic there's another
form of neuroscience
that comes into play to explain the
power of video and it's called
mirror neurons mirroring atoms are the
part of our brains that fire
when we see somebody doing something as
if we're doing it ourselves which i'll
demonstrate i've got a lemon and a slice
of lemon
and if i take a bite of the lemon
my brain fires and my eyes close and
water a little bit
my mouth puckers up and and saliva
glands are doing their thing and um you
know it's a powerful thing to
to bite into a lemon did you feel that
sam biting me biting into the lemon
because your brain is firing too
with that expression i could for anyone
that's not tuning in david squinted his
eyes there just as you can imagine
biting into a quite a bit of lemon and
it's interesting that even people who
are
only listening to the audio and can't
see the video still
feel like they are first they are biting
into a lemon again from mirror neurons
so here's why this is important for
video because
um right now we are filming this
as if we're four feet from the audience
now i'm currently in boston on the east
coast of the us
um i'm probably just under 3000 miles
away from you
sam and and can be
five six seven eight thousand miles from
some of the listeners
you know intellectually i'm not in the
same room with you you know that
however your mirror neurons tell you
that we're
right next to one another about four
feet away it's a
very very powerful thing and this is
precisely why
we feel we we personally know a
television star
or a movie star intellectually we know
we've never met that television star or
movie star
but our mirror neurons fire when we see
them on
tv or the movies a lot and tell us that
we do know them personally so what this
means for video is
if you shoot video like we're doing
right now about
four feet away from the audience that
doesn't mean necessarily four feet from
the camera but about four feet from the
audience
casual tone look directly into the lens
don't use big words you don't need huge
huge high production values
and create interesting content that's a
super powerful way right now
for anybody to build fans on a minimum
or even no budget
um as a way to grow business excellent
stuff david appreciate those tips
so we were talking a little bit before
we started recording
and some of the notes we had down on why
companies actually need to let go of
their physical creations
enabled to be able to grow their fan
base um
so perhaps you could shed a bit more
light on what that actually means and
what we should let go of does that mean
letting go of trying to pitch our
products and things like that or is it
something different
um there's a different well all
different manifestations of this idea of
letting go of your creations
um and it really comes from my love of
the grateful dead so the grateful dead
were one of the only bands in history
that
allowed fans to record their
concerts every other band says no no
recording allowed
the grateful dead said sure you can
record our concerts bring your recording
gear in
and in the early days people traded
cassette tapes later on mp3 files
and that's what allowed the grateful
dead's
music to spread is because people traded
initially the tapes and later the the
data files
and so they they built a massive fan
base them 55 years later they're still
touring not right now this year but i
saw them
six times last year 2019.
um and so this idea of creating
uh information you can deliver for free
you're doing it right now with this
show um hagerty does it with their
youtube channel with their their
database of
car prices and if you create
something with no expectation of
anything in return and give it away
completely free
that super a super powerful way to build
fans
however what most companies do is they
expect
something in return rather than
providing their content for
free it's more of a coercion technique
and the biggest manifestation of that
that i see is when a company creates a
piece of content and requires
an email address to get the content sure
it's way better to put it out there for
free build the fan first
and then tried to sell them something
so i'm guessing from all the points
you've brought up so far david this is
more of a long-term play
than a than a quick win so if we're
putting out these resources there
yeah this is these ideas are not
about how you're going to bring in new
business tomorrow
yes they work to bring in new business
tomorrow but this really
truly is a long-term play and i'm i
don't know as much about
um the state of business in in in
in detail in other countries i've i've
presented in
in-person events in in nearly 50
countries i've visited 107 countries all
seven continents i lived in asia for 10
years
i'm very much an internationalist but
i've lived in the united states now for
about 20 years the last 20 years
and in this country it's very much a
quarterly business cycle all publicly
traded companies have to report
on a quarterly cycle and venture capital
firm
companies um companies that are funded
by venture capital have to report on a
quarterly basis
um so we've developed at least in this
country
and approached a business that you have
to show revenue every single quarter
and that's tied people to want to
try to do whatever they can to bring in
more revenue more revenue more revenue
every quarter it's only
about revenue and that means they're
reluctant to
invest into the long term they're
reluctant to invest in the kinds of
things that we've been talking about for
the last 20 minutes
that will grow fans for the future
they're reluctant to invest in something
that will allow them to have a
sustainable business model for decades
to come
like haggerty insurance has done like
the grateful dead has done
the harry potter franchise even has done
and instead they're all about how can we
get customers today to add to our
quarterly numbers
um so yeah this is a long-term play and
i think um
sam that you know this pandemic i think
has taught us
that being kinder and gentler
in our approach to business is a good
thing
you know constantly trying to focus on
how you can
extract the last penny of profit
from every single customer i don't know
if that's sustainable
i mean i just think i just think that
you know
we humans are going through so much
during this period of time the 20 the
year 2020
has been difficult and um in my country
and i think in your country too there's
been a lot of polarization
recently in the political process i know
there's polarization that's built into
the social media platforms especially
facebook you know facebook has has
drifted to be an
evil place because what they're trying
to do is
get you to be part of a group of people
and and to subscribe to weird conspiracy
theories and
and other things that that are truly
dangerous so
the kinder and gentler you can be the
more you can build a tribe the more you
can
make a happy place and i know i'm
sounding a little bit airy fairy kind of
northern california-ish now i get that
but
but it truly is a different way to
approach business that can be super
successful
yeah and on that note david um again
before we started recording this we were
talking a little bit about passion
and how it can be effective your own
passion and if you work as part of a
team
you've got colleagues or team members
and their passion as well is quite
important to build up your fans your fan
base
um can you elaborate a little bit more
on that side of things past yeah your
passion is really interesting because
um people are um are very very much
attracted to people who have
passion and interestingly it's not
necessarily
passion for your company it can be
passion for the thing that you like to
do in your private life
um so we've already talked about my
passion for live music i've been to 804
live music concerts since the age of 15.
in fact yesterday as we're recording
this
september 23rd 2020 which was yesterday
was the 40th anniversary of bob marley's
last concert which was september 23rd
1980 in pittsburgh pennsylvania
i shot the only known photographs of
that show i was a 19 year old college
student
amazing and yeah and those photos became
historic
yesterday was a big day for me it was
some newspaper articles and whatnot
about those photos
and people who follow me know i'm
passionate about live music
what does that have to do with what i do
write books and give speeches not a
whole lot
but they know i'm passionate about music
so they're attracted to me
um when raco and i studied this idea
the idea of how you can grow fans one of
the things that surprised us the most
was how important this idea of passion
is it was really surprising to us how
important that idea was
and because people are attracted to
other people who have passion
we um ran across a dentist his name is
dr john murashi
and dr marashi is a dentist in southern
california and um
and dr marashi met me at a tony robbins
event i speak at tony robbins business
mastery events a couple years ago
and i talked to the about the idea of
fandom i talked about the idea of
passion he approached me after
the talk and said you know david i hear
you i get
i get what you're saying about this idea
of passion but
i'm a dentist i mean what what are you
what are you talking about i mean we
just fixed teeth
so i said well dr marashi what do you
love to do and he said
well i love to skateboard and then i
said well
um cool tell me a little bit about your
dental practice
and he said well i'm in dentists in
southern california there's
10 000 other dentists in southern
california we all look the same
and i said well you would look different
if you shared your passion for
skateboarding and that's exactly what he
did so
he put skateboards on the wall of his
dental practice
he skateboards from one examination room
to the other
he has a website with pictures of him
skateboarding
on the website he has an instagram with
i think it's about 15 000 followers now
where there are images of him and videos
of him skateboarding
and he contacted me a couple of months
ago and said david since we met a couple
years ago
um you're i've implemented this idea of
just sharing my passion for
skateboarding
and i've been able to measure that just
that one switch
in the way i do my business was
responsible for a
30 growth in my new patients last year
and a 23
growth in my revenue last year directly
attributable to the simple fact
that i started to talk about how i love
the skateboard and that separated me
from every other dentist out there
i'm a business book author that loves
live music talks about it a lot that
separates me from other business book
authors
so showcasing what you're passionate
about is a super interesting way to grow
fans
that's awesome man and i love i love
that he likes skateboarding being a
skateboarder back in my youth as well
yeah
yeah it's fascinating and uh he's a good
one too i mean
i couldn't do anything near what he's
doing awesome
no it's really great that he can take an
industry where he thought that
there wasn't anything particularly
interesting um for anyone that's outside
of the dentist industry that right that
would actually engage them and then you
gave him that thought that he could use
his personal interest and
and it's it's kind of skyrocketed from
there by the sound of it with 30 grace
he's doing a great yeah great job really
good i'm sure it's a lot of food for
thought for anyone in a similar industry
so they can take their own personal
interests and use that for any
branding absolutely any industry i mean
that was something that was so
interesting to reiko and i as we were
studying this it doesn't matter you know
he's a dentist
um you know we talked about insurance um
we found a u.s government agency a u.s
government agency that has over 50
million fans you can be walking down the
street in any city in the world
and not be surprised if somebody
approaches you
with it wearing a t-shirt with the logo
of this government agency you know how
i'm talking about sam
nasa yeah it's nasa right it's nasa
they're a u.s government agency with
fans all
over the world um so you know
u.s government agency dentist doctor
lawyer
business to business software company
non-profit consumer products coming it
doesn't matter anybody can grow fans
love it man this this has been great
david i really appreciate your your
thoughts
and how we can apply this to our own
businesses
and how we can relate our personal lives
as well to really encourage our
followers our fan base and and make it
happen man
i um i think sam that it's pretty i mean
i've mentioned this a couple of times
but it's particularly
poignant right now you know where a lot
of us
are are struggling frankly and some of
us have businesses where it's been
really tough because
of the pandemic and um these ideas that
i've shared and other ones that are in
our book fanocracy
are things that we can do right now
um to position ourselves for the future
yes you can also grow revenue right now
but
i'm you know looking forward to the day
that i can give
in-person speeches event again my uh
i've delivered
hundreds and hundreds of in-person
speeches 40
nearly 50 countries so far the last one
i delivered was on march
2nd of 2020 that's six months ago um i
can't wait till i get back to
in person speaking but but i can build
fans now
everybody can build fans now so that
when we emerge from this you're that
much stronger
yeah i really i've got a lot of time for
it david and i'm all about the long term
play anyone who follows my stuff on
linkedin knows i'm always talking about
long-term strategies
be it digital marketing or otherwise so
i think that's definitely something that
resonates with myself and i'm sure a lot
of a lot of people tuning in picked up
some great
tips really appreciate it dude david i'd
like to ask everyone that comes on
is there one digital marketing channel
of choice
that you think people should be on or be
utilizing that's going to help them from
today
uh yes there is one very particular
digital channel that you should be on
and that's the one
that you love the most you know people
always say to me david
should i be on twitter or linkedin or
youtube or whatever it might be
and my answer is always i can't tell you
that you know what
what do you love to do do you love
to have conversations with people maybe
you should be a podcaster do you
love to engage with people maybe you
should be focused on twitter
create videos you know like we're doing
right now you
maybe create a channel where you can
deliver a video podcast like this um or
you can have a youtube channel whatever
it is
because the truth is that if you try to
do something you don't enjoy it you
won't keep up with it you probably won't
be very good at it do what you love to
do
what a great answer well everyone you've
been tuning in to sam's business growth
show where we sit down on business
leaders
experts and entrepreneurs from around
the globe we found out their story
how digital marketing has helped along
the way and their exclusive tips and
insights to help you skyrocket your
sales and score
your business david if you could thank
just one person either dead or alive
having a positive influence on yourself
and your career who would that be
and why that's interesting i would say
my wife yukari because she was the one
who
pushed me really hard to start my own
business
um when i lost my job when i was fired
by thompson reuters she's like david go
out on your own you know
um don't don't work for somebody else
work for yourself and so i i really
credit her with
with with pushing me in that direction
awesome man well david please do tell us
a bit more about how everyone can learn
from you how they can connect with you
a bit more about your books and the best
way people can get in touch sure so if
you're
interested in these the ideas that we've
been discussing today in this book
fanocracy turning fans and new customers
and customers into fans that i wrote
with my daughter
we've got a website at www
www.fanucracy.com you can check stuff
out there
on the social networks um twitter and
and instagram and stuff
i am dm scott d-m-s-c-o-t-t
and i use my middle name which is mirmin
so my full name is david meerman scott
d-a-b-i-d-m-e-e-r-n
m-e-e-r-m-a-n-s-c-o-t-t i'm the only
david mearman scott on the entire planet
so if you google me you get me
and you can find it a lot more that way
as well good man thank you once again
david
thanks sam it's been fun are you tired
of constantly hunting for new customers
you could be missing out on regular
inbound opportunities all because
your website isn't on the first page of
google
perhaps you're already spending lots of
money on advertising but your website is
failing to convert
all of your hard-earned visitors into a
consistent flow
of new customers if you'd like to learn
more about our unusual approach
that brings idle clients straight to you
connect with sam dunning on linkedin
or book a free 20-minute consultation
via webchoiceuk.com
that's webchoice uk
subscribe today for more digital
marketing sales and business growth tips
from the experts